@node Beam Parameters
@section Beam parameters
@cindex BEAMS
@cindex BEAM_ENERGIES

Mandatory settings to set up the colliding particle beams are
@itemize @bullet
@item The initial beam particles specified through 
@option{BEAMS}, given by their PDG
particle number. For (anti)protons and (positrons) electrons, 
for example, these are given by (-)2212 or (-)11, respectively. 
The code for photons is 22. If you provide a single particle number,
both beams will consist of that particle type. If the beams consist
of different particles, a list of two values have to be provided.
@item The energies of both incoming beams are defined through
@option{BEAM_ENERGIES},
given in units of GeV. Again, single values apply to both beams,
whereas a list of two values have to be given when the two beams
do not have the same energy.
@end itemize

Examples would be
@verbatim
# LHC
BEAMS: 2212
BEAM_ENERGIES: 7000

# HERA
BEAMS: [-11, 2212]
BEAM_ENERGIES: [27.5, 820]
@end verbatim

More options related to beamstrahlung and intrinsic transverse momentum can
be found in the following subsections.

@menu
* Beam Spectra::  Options related to beamstrahlung
* Intrinsic Transverse Momentum:: Options related to primordial transverse momentum
@end menu

@node Beam Spectra
@subsection Beam Spectra
@cindex BEAM_SPECTRA
@cindex SPECTRUM_FILES
@cindex BEAM_SMIN
@cindex BEAM_SMAX

If desired, you can also specify spectra for beamstrahlung through
@code{BEAM_SPECTRA}. The possible values are
Possible values are
@table @option
@item Monochromatic
The beam energy is unaltered and the beam particles remain unchanged. 
That is the default and corresponds to ordinary hadron-hadron or 
lepton-lepton collisions.
@item Laser_Backscattering
This can be used to describe the backscattering of a laser beam
off initial leptons. The energy distribution of the emerging 
photon beams is modelled by the CompAZ parametrization, see
@mycite{Zarnecki2002qr}.
Note that this parametrization is valid only for the proposed 
TESLA photon collider, as various assumptions about the laser 
parameters and the initial lepton beam energy have been made.
See details below.
@item Simple_Compton
This corresponds to a simple light backscattering 
off the initial lepton beam and produces initial-state 
photons with a corresponding energy spectrum.  See details below.
@item EPA
This enables the equivalent photon approximation for
colliding protons, see @mycite{Archibald2008aa}. The resulting beam particles are photons that 
follow a dipole form factor parametrization, cf. @mycite{Budnev1974de}.
The authors would like to thank T. Pierzchala for his help in
implementing and testing the corresponding code. See details below.
@item Spectrum_Reader
A user defined spectrum is used to describe the energy spectrum
of the assumed new beam particles. The name of the corresponding
spectrum file needs to be given through the keywords
@code{SPECTRUM_FILES}.
@end table

The @code{BEAM_SMIN} and @code{BEAM_SMAX} parameters may be used to specify the
minimum/maximum fraction of cms energy
squared after Beamstrahlung. The reference value is the total centre
of mass energy squared of the collision, @emph{not} the 
centre of mass energy after eventual Beamstrahlung.
@*
The parameter can be specified using the internal interpreter, see
@ref{Interpreter}, e.g. as @samp{BEAM_SMIN: sqr(20/E_CMS)}.

@subsubsection Laser Backscattering
@cindex E_LASER
@cindex P_LASER
@cindex LASER_MODE
@cindex LASER_ANGLES
@cindex LASER_NONLINEARITY
The energy distribution of the photon beams is modelled by the CompAZ
parametrisation, see @mycite{Zarnecki2002qr}, with various assumptions
valid only for the proposed TESLA photon collider. The laser energies
can be set by @code{E_LASER}. @code{P_LASER} sets their polarisations,
defaulting to @code{0.}.  Both settings can either be set to a single value,
applying to both beams, or to a list of two values, one for each beam.
The @code{LASER_MODE}
takes the values @code{-1}, @code{0}, and @code{1}, defaulting to @code{0}.
@code{LASER_ANGLES} and @code{LASER_NONLINEARITY} can be set to @code{true} or
to @code{false} (default).

@subsubsection Simple Compton
This corresponds to a simple light backscattering off the initial lepton
beam and produces initial-state photons with a corresponding energy spectrum.
It is a special case of the above Laser Backscattering with
@code{LASER_MODE: -1}.

@subsubsection EPA
@cindex EPA_q2Max
@cindex EPA_ptMin
@cindex EPA_Form_Factor
@cindex EPA_AlphaQED

The equivalent photon approximation,
cf. @mycite{Archibald2008aa}, @mycite{Budnev1974de},
has a few free parameters:
@table @option
@item EPA_q2Max
Parameter of the EPA spectra of the two beams, defaults to @code{2.}
in units of GeV squared.
@item EPA_ptMin
Infrared regulator to the EPA beam spectra. Given in GeV, the value must be
between @code{0.} and @code{1.} for EPA approximation to hold.
Defaults to @code{0.}, i.e. the spectrum
has to be regulated by cuts on the observable, cf @ref{Selectors}.
@item EPA_Form_Factor
Form factor model to be used on the beams. The options are
@code{0} (pointlike), @code{1} (homogeneously charged sphere,
@code{2} (gaussian shaped nucleus), and @code{3} (homogeneously charged
sphere, smoothed at low and high x). Applicable only to heavy ion beams.
Defaults to @code{0}.
@item EPA_AlphaQED
Value of alphaQED to be used in the EPA. Defaults to @code{0.0072992701}.
@end table

@code{EPA_q2Max}, @code{EPA_ptMin}, @code{EPA_Form_Factor} can either be set to
single values that are then applied to both beams, or to a list of two values,
for the respective beams.


@node Intrinsic Transverse Momentum
@subsection Intrinsic Transverse Momentum
@cindex INTRINSIC_KPERP
@cindex K_PERP_SCHEME
@cindex K_PERP_MEAN
@cindex K_PERP_SIGMA
@cindex K_PERP_EXP
@cindex K_PERP_EREF
@cindex BEAM_REMNANTS

The intrinsic transverse momentum of the colliding particles can be
set by subsettings of the @code{INTRINSIC_KPERP} setting:
@verbatim
INTRINSIC_KPERP:
  Parameter_1: <value_1>
  Parameter_2: <value_2>
...
@end verbatim

The possible parameters and their defaults are
@table @option
@item ENABLED (default: true)
Setting this to @code{false} disables the intrinsic transverse momentum
altogether.

@item SCHEME (default for protons: 0)
This parameter specifies the scheme to calculate the intrinsic transverse
momentum of the beams in case of hadronic beams, such as protons.

@item MEAN (default: 1.1)
This parameter specifies the mean intrinsic transverse
momentum in GeV for the beams in case of hadronic
beams, such as protons.
@*
If two values are provided, the intrinsic momenta means of the two beams are
set to these two values, respectively.

@item SIGMA (default: 0.85)
This parameter specifies the width of the Gaussian distribution in GeV of the
intrinsic transverse momenta for the beams in
case of hadronic beams, such as protons.
@*
If two values are provided, the intrinsic momenta widths of the two beams are
set to these two values, respectively.

@item EXP (default: 0.55)
This parameter specifies the energy extrapolation exponent 
of the width of the Gaussian distribution
of intrinsic transverse momentum for the beams in
case of hadronic beams, such as protons.
@*
If two values are provided, the exponents for each of the two beams are set
to these two values, respectively.

@item EREF (default: 7000)
This parameter specifies the reference scale in GeV in the energy extrapolation
of the width of the Gaussian distribution of intrinsic transverse momentum for
the beams in
case of hadronic beams, such as protons.
@*
If two values are provided, the reference scales for each of the two beams are
set to these two values, respectively.

@end table

If the option @option{BEAM_REMNANTS: false} is specified, pure parton-level
events are simulated, i.e. no beam remnants are generated. Accordingly,
partons entering the hard scattering process do not acquire primordial
transverse momentum.
