@node ISR Parameters
@section ISR parameters
@cindex BUNCH_1
@cindex BUNCH_2
@cindex ISR_SMIN
@cindex ISR_SMAX
@cindex ISR_E_ORDER
@cindex ISR_E_SCHEME
@cindex PDF_LIBRARY
@cindex PDF_LIBRARY_1
@cindex PDF_LIBRARY_2
@cindex PDF_SET
@cindex PDF_SET_1
@cindex PDF_SET_2
@cindex PDF_SET_VERSION
@cindex PDF_SET_VERSION_1
@cindex PDF_SET_VERSION_2
@cindex SHOW_PDF_SETS

The following parameters are used to steer the setup of beam substructure and
initial state radiation (ISR).

@table @code
@item BUNCHES
Specify the PDG ID of the first
(left) and second (right) bunch particle (or both if only one value is
provided), i.e. the particle after eventual Beamstrahlung specified through the
beam parameters, see @ref{Beam Parameters}.  Per default these are taken to be
identical to the values set using @code{BEAMS}, assuming the default beam
spectrum is
Monochromatic. In case the Simple Compton or Laser Backscattering spectra are
enabled the bunch particles would have to be set to 22, the PDG code of the
photon.

@item ISR_SMIN/ISR_SMAX
This parameter specifies the minimum fraction of cms energy
squared after ISR. The reference value is the total centre
of mass energy squared of the collision, @emph{not} the 
centre of mass energy after eventual Beamstrahlung.
@*
The parameter can be specified using the internal interpreter,
see @ref{Interpreter}, e.g. as @code{ISR_SMIN: sqr(20/E_CMS)}.
@end table

Sherpa provides access to a variety of structure functions.
They can be configured with the following parameters.

@table @code
@item PDF_LIBRARY
This parameter takes the list of PDF interfaces to load.
The following options are distributed with Sherpa:
@table @code
@item LHAPDFSherpa
Use PDF's from LHAPDF @mycite{Whalley2005nh}. The interface is only
available if Sherpa has been compiled with support for LHAPDF, see
@ref{Installation}.
@item CT14Sherpa
Built-in library for some PDF sets from the CTEQ collaboration,
cf. @mycite{Dulat2015mca}. This is the default.
@item CT12Sherpa
Built-in library for some PDF sets from the CTEQ collaboration,
cf. @mycite{Gao2013xoa}.
@item CT10Sherpa
Built-in library for some PDF sets from the CTEQ collaboration,
cf. @mycite{Lai2010vv}.
@item CTEQ6Sherpa
Built-in library for some PDF sets from the CTEQ collaboration,
cf. @mycite{Nadolsky2008zw}.
@item NNPDF30NLO
Built-in library for PDF sets from the NNPDF group, cf. @mycite{Ball2014uwa}.
@item MSTW08Sherpa
Built-in library for PDF sets from the MSTW group, cf. @mycite{Martin2009iq}.
@item MRST04QEDSherpa
Built-in library for photon PDF sets from the MRST group, cf. @mycite{Martin2004dh}.
@item MRST01LOSherpa
Built-in library for the 2001 leading-order PDF set from the MRST group, cf. @mycite{Martin2001es}.
@item MRST99Sherpa
Built-in library for the 1999 PDF sets from the MRST group, cf. @mycite{Martin1999ww}.
@item GRVSherpa
Built-in library for the GRV photon PDF @mycite{Gluck1991jc}, @mycite{Gluck1991ee}
@item PDFESherpa
Built-in library for the electron structure function.
The perturbative order of the fine structure constant can be set using the
parameter @anchor{ISR_E_ORDER} @code{ISR_E_ORDER} (default: 1). The
switch @anchor{ISR_E_SCHEME} @code{ISR_E_SCHEME} allows
to set the scheme of respecting non-leading terms. Possible options are 0
("mixed choice"), 1 ("eta choice"), or 2 ("beta choice", default).
@item None
No PDF. Fixed beam energy.
@end table
@*
Furthermore it is simple to build an external interface to an arbitrary PDF
and load that dynamically in the Sherpa run. See @ref{External PDF} for
instructions.
@item PDF_SET
Specifies the PDF set for hadronic bunch particles. All sets available in the
chosen @code{PDF_LIBRARY} can be figured by running Sherpa with the parameter
@code{SHOW_PDF_SETS: 1}, e.g.:
@verbatim
  Sherpa 'PDF_LIBRARY: CTEQ6Sherpa' 'SHOW_PDF_SETS: 1'
@end verbatim  
If the two colliding beams are of different type, e.g. protons and electrons
or photons and electrons, it is possible to specify two different PDF sets by
providing two values: @option{PDF_SET: [pdf1, pdf2]}. @anchor{PDF_SET} The
special value @code{Default} can be used as a placeholder for letting Sherpa
choose the appropriate PDF set (or none).
@item PDF_SET_VERSIONS
This parameter allows to select a specific version (member) within the chosen
PDF set. It is possible to specify two different PDF sets using
@option{PDF_SET_VERSIONS: [version1, version2]}. @anchor{PDF_SET_VERSIONS}
@comment Specifying a negative value, e.g.
@comment @verbatim
@comment   PDF_LIBRARY: LHAPDFSherpa
@comment   PDF_SET: NNPDF12_100.LHgrid
@comment   PDF_SET_VERSION: -100
@comment @end verbatim
@comment results in Sherpa sampling all sets 1..100, which can be used to obtain
@comment the averaging required when employing PDF's from the NNPDF
@comment collaboration @mycite{Ball2008by}, @mycite{Ball2009mk}.
@end table
