@node LHC_ADD
@section LHC_ADD

This example shows a set-up for the ADD model. This is one of Sherpa's
built-in BSM options. For more information on using your own BSM models
with Sherpa, see @ref{Exotic physics}.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude ../Examples/LHC_ADD/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item the matrix element generator AMEGIC++ is used
for this set-up.

@item the model is chosen in the @code{(model)} section of
the run card, using the parameter @code{MODEL}, see
@ref{Model Parameters}. The default is the SM. 

@item for a full description of all parameters in any 
chosen model, use the tag @code{SHOW_MODEL_SYNTAX=1} 
on the command line when running Sherpa.

@item the properties of the graviton (@code{<id> = 39}) and
graviscalar (@code{<id> = 40}),
such as e.g. @code{MASS[<id>]} and @code{WIDTH[<id>]},
may be set in the runcard, or on the command line, 
in exactly the same way as the SM particle properties.

@item the number of extra dimensions is fixed to @code{N_ED = 2}.
Further the cut-off scale and the ADD scale M_S have been set equal
to a rather low value (2 TeV).

@item the analysis has been switched off, but
to use it, switch @ref{ANALYSIS} to @option{1}.

@item the analysis in this example uses Sherpa's
in-built analysis package. To use this Analysis 
package, when Sherpa is installed, the option
@kbd{--enable-analysis} must be include on the 
command line when Sherpa is configured, see 
@ref{ANALYSIS}. To display the Analysis
package syntax, run Sherpa with 
@code{SHOW_ANALYSIS_SYNTAX=1} on the command line.
@end itemize


