@node LHC_WJets
@subsection W+jets production at the LHC

@menu
* LHC_W_MCatNLO::
* LHC_W1jet_MCatNLO::
* LHC_W2jets_MCatNLO::
* LHC_WJets_MEPS::
* LHC_WJets_MEPS_forNLO::
* LHC_WJets_MENLOPS::
* LHC_WJets_MENLOPS_forNLO::
* LHC_WJets_MEPSatNLO::
@end menu

To change any of the following examples to production at the Tevatron 
simply change the beam settings to
@verbatim
  BEAM_1  2212; BEAM_ENERGY_1 980;
  BEAM_2 -2212; BEAM_ENERGY_2 980;
@end verbatim


@node LHC_W_MCatNLO
@subsubsection MC@@NLO setup for pp->W+X

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_W_MCatNLO/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

@node LHC_W1jet_MCatNLO
@subsubsection MC@@NLO setup for pp->W+jet+X

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_W1jet_MCatNLO/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

@node LHC_W2jets_MCatNLO
@subsubsection MC@@NLO setup for pp->W+2jets+X

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_W2jets_MCatNLO/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

@node LHC_WJets_MEPS
@subsubsection MEPS setup for pp->W+jets

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets_MEPS/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

@node LHC_WJets_MEPS_forNLO
@subsubsection MEPS setup for comparison to MEPS@@NLO

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets_MEPS/Run.NLOcomparison.dat
@end smallformat
@end example


@node LHC_WJets_MENLOPS
@subsubsection MENLOPS setup for pp->W+jets

This setup implements the MENLOPS method, combining both MC@@NLO-style 
NLO matrix element parton shower matching and CKKW-style multijet merging, 
cf. @mycite{Hoeche2012yf}, @mycite{Gehrmann2012yg}. Its result, after switching 
on both the hadronisation and underlying event modules, can then be directly 
compared to experimental data.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets_MENLOPS/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item This is a LHC setup for inclusive W boson production, using the MENLOPS 
method.
@item The automated dipole subtraction implemented in the matrix element 
generator Amegic @mycite{Gleisberg2007md} is used.
@item An internal hard-coded matrix element is used for the virtual term. For 
more information on how to interface @ref{External one-loop ME}s see the 
linked section.
@item Further, Amegic is invoked for all matrix elements with final state 
multiplicities 2 and 3, while Comix is used for all other.
@item The kt-resolution parameter determining the splitting between singular 
and regular real contributions is set to 8.
@item Neither hadronisation nor underlying event corrections are taken into 
account. Both can be switched on by setting the relevant @ref{Parameters} 
accordingly.

@end itemize

@node LHC_WJets_MENLOPS_forNLO
@subsubsection MENLOPS setup for comparison to MEPS@@NLO

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets_MENLOPS/Run.NLOcomparison.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

@node LHC_WJets_MEPSatNLO
@subsubsection MEPS@@NLO setup for pp->W+jets

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets_MEPSatNLO/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example


