@node LHC_HPP_POWHEG
@section LHC_HPP_POWHEG

This setup implements a matching of NLO matrix elements with the parton 
shower using the POWHEG method, cf. @mycite{Hoche2010pf}, @mycite{Nason2004rx}, 
@mycite{Frixione2007vw}. Its result, after switching on both the hadronisation 
and underlying event modules, can then be directly compared to experimental 
data.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/LHC_HPP_POWHEG/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item This is a LHC setup at 7 TeV for a parton shower matched NLO 
simulation, using the POWHEG method.
@item The model has been set to the Standard Model supplemented with effective 
Higgs couplings, cf. @ref{EHC}. Top mass effects in the effective 
gluon-gluon-Higgs vertex and both top mass and W mass effects in the effective 
photon-photon-Higgs vertex are taken into account.
@item The explicite generation of an s-channel Higgs-resonance decaying into 
a pair of prompt photons is enforced. Width effects 
and spin-correlations are accounted for.
@item The renormalisation and factorisation scales are set to the transverse 
mass of the photon pair.
@item The automated dipole subtraction implemented in matrix element generator 
Amegic @mycite{Gleisberg2007md} is used.
@item An internal hard-coded matrix element is used for the virtual term. For 
more information on how to interface @ref{External one-loop ME}s see the 
linked section.
@item Neither hadronisation nor underlying event corrections are taken into 
account. Both can be switched on by setting the relevant @ref{Parameters} 
accordingly.

@end itemize
