@node LHC_HTTBar
@subsection Associated t anti-t H production at the LHC


This set-up illustrates the interface to an external loop matrix element
generator as well as the possibility of specifying hard decays for 
particles emerging from the hard interaction. The process generated 
is the production of a Higgs boson in association with a top quark pair 
from two light partons in the initial state. Each top quark decays into 
an (anti-)bottom quark and a W boson. The W bosons in turn decay to either 
quarks or leptons.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/H_in_TTBar/LHC_TTH_MCatNLO/Sherpa.yaml
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize
@item The virtual matrix elements can be interfaced either from OpenLoops or
  from @mycite{Reina2001sf},
  @mycite{Reina2001bc}, @mycite{Dawson2002tg}, @mycite{Dawson2003zu}.
  In the latter case,
  the shared library necessary for running this setup is built using
  @uref{http://www.scons.org/,,scons -f SConstruct-TTH}.
@item The top quarks are stable in the hard matrix elements.
  They are decayed using the internal decay module, indicated by
  the settings in the @option{HARD_DECAYS} and @option{PARTICLE_DATA} blocks.
@item Widths of top and Higgs are set to 0 for the matrix element calculation.
  A kinematical Breit-Wigner distribution will be imposed a-posteriori in the
  decay module.
@item The Yukawa coupling of the b-quark has been set to a non-zero value to 
  allow the H->bb decay channel even despite keeping the b-quark massless for a 
  five-flavour-scheme calculation.
@item Higgs BRs are not included in the cross section
  (@option{Apply_Branching_Ratios: false}) as they will be LO only and not
  include loop-induced decays
@end itemize
