@node PEPII_BaBar
@section PEPII_BaBar

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/PEPII_BaBar/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

This example shows a set up for the BaBar experiment at the PEPII collider, with
electrons and positrons colliding at a centre of mass energy of 10.58 GeV. It
also serves as an example for a setup with asymmetric beams. Two processes have
been specified, the production of a B+ B- pair and the production of B0 B0bar
pair. Hence, both processes will be mixed according to their respective cross
sections into an inclusive sample.

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item as PEPII is an asymmetric collider, both beams are set to different
energies: the electron beam is set to 9.0 GeV, the positron beam to 3.109 GeV.

@item the processes specified are the production of a B+ B- pair and a B0 B0bar
pair, both produced via a Y(4S) resonance.

@item the PDF has been set to an internal electron PDF for both beams, such that
both beams may undergo initial state radiation (ISR). For the ISR scheme
definitions for electrons, see @ref{ISR Parameters}.

@item a simple analysis histogramming certain final state multiplicities has
been added, using Sherpa's internal analysis package. To use this Analysis
package, when Sherpa is installed, the option @kbd{--enable-analysis} must be
include on the command line when Sherpa is configured, see @ref{ANALYSIS}. 
Further, it has to be switched on by setting @code{ANALYSIS = 1}. To
display the analysis package syntax, run Sherpa with
@code{SHOW_ANALYSIS_SYNTAX=1} on the command line.

@end itemize


