@node Run Parameters
@section Run Parameters

The following parameters describe general run information. They may be set in the @code{(run)} section of the run-card, see @ref{Input structure}.

@menu
* EVENTS::            Number of events to generate.
* OUTPUT::            Output level.
* LOG_FILE::          Log file.
* RANDOM_SEED::       Seed for random number generator.
* ANALYSIS::          Switch internal analysis on or off.
* ANALYSIS_OUTPUT::   Directory for generated analysis histogram files.
* TIMEOUT::           Run time limitation.
* RLIMIT_AS::         Memory limitation.
* BATCH_MODE::        Batch mode settings.
* NUM_ACCURACY::      Accuracy for gauge tests.

* SHERPA_CPP_PATH::   The C++ code generation path.
* SHERPA_LIB_PATH::   The runtime library path.

* Event output formats:: Event output in different formats.
* MPI parallelization::  MPI parallelization with Sherpa.
* Multi-threading::      Multi-threaded integration with Sherpa.
@end menu


@node EVENTS
@subsection EVENTS
@cindex EVENTS
This parameter specifies the number of events to be generated.
@*
It can alternatively be set on the command line through option
@option{-e}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node OUTPUT
@subsection OUTPUT
@cindex OUTPUT
@cindex EVT_OUTPUT
This parameter specifies the output level (verbosity) of the program.
@*
It can alternatively be set on the command line through option
@option{-O}, see @ref{Command line}. A different output level can be 
specified for the event generation step through @option{EVT_OUTPUT}
or command line option @option{-o}, see @ref{Command line}

The value can be any sum of the following:
@itemize @bullet
@item
0: Error messages (-> always displayed).
@item
1: Event display.
@item
2: Informational messages during the run.
@item
4: Tracking messages (lots of output).
@item
8: Debugging messages (even more output).
@end itemize

E.g. OUTPUT=3 would display information, events and errors.

@node LOG_FILE
@subsection LOG_FILE
@cindex LOG_FILE
This parameter specifies the log file. If set, the standard output 
from Sherpa is written to the specified file, but output from child
processes is not redirected. This option is particularly useful to produce
clean log files when running the code in MPI mode, see @ref{MPI parallelization}.
A file name can alternatively be specified on the command line through option
@option{-l}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node RANDOM_SEED
@subsection RANDOM_SEED
@cindex RANDOM_SEED
@cindex RANDOM_SEED1
@cindex RANDOM_SEED2
SHERPA uses a random-number generator as described in
[Florida State University Report FSU-SCRI-87-50].
The two independent integer-valued seeds are specified by the option
``RANDOM_SEED=A B''. The seeds A and B may range from 0 to 31328 and from
0 to 30081, respectively. They can also directly be set using 
``RANDOM_SEED1=A'' and ``RANDOM_SEED2=B'' If RANDOM_SEED is not 
specified at all or only by one integer number, the old random-number 
generator (SHERPA 1.0.6 and older) will be used. This value can also be set 
using the command line option @option{-R}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node ANALYSIS
@subsection ANALYSIS
@cindex ANALYSIS
Analysis routines can be switched on or off by setting the ANALYSIS flag.
The default is no analysis, corresponding to option @option{0}.
This parameter can also be specified on the command line using option
@option{-a}, see @ref{Command line}.

The following analysis handlers are currently available
@table @option
@item Internal
Sherpa's internal analysis handler.
@*
To use this option, the package must be configured with option @option{--enable-analysis}.
@*
An output directory can be specified using @ref{ANALYSIS_OUTPUT}.
@item Rivet
The Rivet package, see @uref{http://projects.hepforge.org/rivet/,,Rivet Website}.
@*
To enable it, Rivet and HepMC have to be installed and Sherpa must be configured
as described in @ref{Rivet analyses}.
@item HZTool
The HZTool package, see @uref{http://hztool.hepforge.org/,,HZTool Website}.
@*
To enable it, HZTool and CERNLIB have to be installed and Sherpa must be configured
as described in @ref{HZTool analyses}.
@end table

Multiple options can be combined using a comma, e.g. @samp{ANALYSIS=Internal,Rivet}.

@node ANALYSIS_OUTPUT
@subsection ANALYSIS_OUTPUT
@cindex ANALYSIS_OUTPUT
Name of the directory for histogram files when using the internal analysis
and name of the Aida file when using Rivet, see @ref{ANALYSIS}. 
The directory / file will be created w.r.t. the working directory. The default
value is @option{Analysis/}. This parameter can also be specified on the 
command line using option @option{-A}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node TIMEOUT
@subsection TIMEOUT
@cindex TIMEOUT
A run time limitation can be given in user CPU seconds through TIMEOUT. This option is of
some relevance when running SHERPA on a batch system. Since in many cases jobs are just
terminated, this allows to interrupt a run, to store all relevant information and to restart
it without any loss. This is particularly useful when carrying out long integrations.
Alternatively, setting the TIMEOUT variable to -1, which is the default setting, translates into
having no run time limitation at all. The unit is seconds.

@node RLIMIT_AS
@subsection RLIMIT_AS
@cindex RLIMIT_AS
@cindex RLIMIT_BY_CPU
A memory limitation can be given to prevent Sherpa to crash the system it is 
running on as it continues to build up matrix elements and loads additional 
libraries at run time. Per default the maximum RAM of the system is determined 
and set as the memory limit. This can be changed by giving 
@code{RLIMIT_AS=<size>} where the size is given as eg. @code{500MB} or 
@code{4 GB}. When running with @ref{MPI parallelization} it might be necessary 
to divide the total maximum by the number of cores. This can be done by 
setting @code{RLIMIT_BY_CPU=1}.

@node BATCH_MODE
@subsection BATCH_MODE
@cindex BATCH_MODE
Whether or not to run Sherpa in batch mode. The default is @option{1}, 
meaning Sherpa does not attempt to save runtime information when catching 
a signal or an exception. On the contrary, if option @option{0} is used, 
Sherpa will store potential integration information and analysis results, 
once the run is terminated abnormally. All possible settings are:
@itemize
@item @var{0} Sherpa attempts to write out integration and analysis 
results when catching an exception.
@item @var{1} Sherpa does not attempt to write out integration and 
analysis results when catching an exception.
@item @var{2} Sherpa outputs the event counter continously, instead 
of overwriting the previous one (default when using @ref{LOG_FILE}).
@item @var{4} Sherpa increases the on-screen event counter in constant 
steps of 100 instead of an increase relative to the current event 
number.
@end itemize
The settings are additive such that multiple settings can be employed 
at the same time.

@emph{Note that when running the code on a cluster or in a grid environment, BATCH_MODE should always contain setting 1 (i.e. BATCH_MODE=[1|3|5|7]).}

The command line option @option{-b} should therefore not be used in this case, see
@ref{Command line}.

@node NUM_ACCURACY
@subsection NUM_ACCURACY
@cindex NUM_ACCURACY
The targeted numerical accuracy can be specified through NUM ACCURACY, e.g. for comparing
two numbers. This might have to be reduced if gauge tests fail for numerical reasons.

@node SHERPA_CPP_PATH
@subsection SHERPA_CPP_PATH
@cindex SHERPA_CPP_PATH
The path in which Sherpa will eventually store dynamically created C++ source code.
If not specified otherwise, sets @option{SHERPA_LIB_PATH} to 
@samp{$SHERPA_CPP_PATH/Process/lib}. This value can also be set using the command line 
option @option{-L}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node SHERPA_LIB_PATH
@subsection SHERPA_LIB_PATH
@cindex SHERPA_LIB_PATH
The path in which Sherpa looks for dynamically linked libraries from previously created
C++ source code, cf. @ref{SHERPA_CPP_PATH}.


@node Event output formats
@subsection Event output formats
@cindex HepMC_GenEvent
@cindex HepMC_Short
@cindex HEPEVT
@cindex LHEF
@cindex Root
@cindex Delphes
@cindex FILE_SIZE
@cindex EVT_FILE_PATH
@cindex OUTPUT_PRECISION
@cindex EVENT_OUTPUT

Sherpa provides the possibility to output events in various formats, 
e.g. the HepEVT common block structure or the HepMC format.
The authors of Sherpa assume that the user is sufficiently acquainted with 
these formats when selecting them.

If the events are to be written to file, the parameter @option{EVENT_OUTPUT}
must be specified together with a file name. An example would be
@code{EVENT_OUTPUT=HepMC_GenEvent[MyFile]}, where @code{MyFile} stands
for the desired file base name. The following formats are currently available:

@table @option
@item HepMC_GenEvent
Generates output in HepMC::IO_GenEvent format. The HepMC::GenEvent::m_weights 
weight vector stores the following items: @code{[0]} event weight, @code{[1]} 
combined matrix element and phase space weight (missing only PDF information, 
thus directly suitable for PDF reweighting), @code{[2]} event weight 
normalisation (in case of unweighted events event weights of ~ +/-1 
can be obtained by (event weight)/(event weight normalisation)), and 
@code{[3]} number of trials. The total cross section of the simulated event sample
can be computed as the sum of event weights divided by the sum of the number of trials.
This value must agree with the total cross section quoted by Sherpa at the end of
the event generation run, and it can serve as a cross-check on the consistency
of the HepMC event file.
@item HepMC_Short
Generates output in HepMC::IO_GenEvent format, however, only incoming beams and 
outgoing particles are stored. Intermediate and decayed particles are not 
listed. The event weights stored as the same as above.
@item Delphes_GenEvent
Generates output in @url{http://root.cern.ch,,Root} format, which can be passed to
@uref{http://cp3.irmp.ucl.ac.be/projects/delphes,,Delphes} for analyses.
Input events are taken from the HepMC interface. Storage space can be reduced
by up to 50% compared to gzip compressed HepMC. This output format is available 
only if Sherpa was configured and installed with options @option{--enable-root} 
and @option{--enable-delphes=/path/to/delphes}.
@item Delphes_Short
Generates output in @url{http://root.cern.ch,,Root} format, which can be passed to
@uref{http://cp3.irmp.ucl.ac.be/projects/delphes,,Delphes} for analyses.
Only incoming beams and outgoing particles are stored.
@item PGS
Generates output in @url{http://cepa.fnal.gov/psm/stdhep,,StdHEP} format, which can be 
passed to @uref{http://www.physics.ucdavis.edu/~conway/research/software/pgs/pgs4-general.htm,,PGS} 
for analyses. This output format is available only if Sherpa was configured and installed 
with options @option{--enable-hepevtsize=4000} and @option{--enable-pgs=/path/to/pgs}.
Please refer to the PGS documentation for how to pass StdHEP event files on to PGS.
If you are using the LHC olympics executeable, you may run
@option{./olympics --stdhep events.lhe <other options>}.

@item PGS_Weighted
Generates output in @url{http://cepa.fnal.gov/psm/stdhep,,StdHEP} format, which can be 
passed to @uref{http://www.physics.ucdavis.edu/~conway/research/software/pgs/pgs4-general.htm,,PGS} 
for analyses. Event weights in the HEPEV4 common block are stored in the event file.
@item HEPEVT
Generates output in HepEvt format.
@item LHEF
Generates output in Les Houches Event File format. This output format is 
intended for output of @strong{matrix element configurations only}. Since the 
format requires PDF information to be written out in the outdated 
PDFLIB/LHAGLUE enumeration format this is only available automatically if 
LHAPDF is used, the identification numbers otherwise have to be given 
explicitly via @code{LHEF_PDF_NUMBER} (@code{LHEF_PDF_NUMBER_1} and 
@code{LHEF_PDF_NUMBER_2} if both beams carry different structure functions). 
This format currently outputs matrix element information only, no information 
about the large-Nc colour flow is given as the LHEF output format is not 
suited to communicate enough information for meaningful parton showering 
on top of multiparton final states.
@item Root
Generates output in ROOT ntuple format @strong{for NLO event generation only}. 
For details on the ntuple format, see @ref{Structure of ROOT NTuple Output}.
This output option is only available if Sherpa was linked to ROOT during 
installation by using the configure option @code{--enable-root=/path/to/root}.
@end table

The output can be further customized using the following options:

@table @option
@item FILE_SIZE
Number of events per file (default: 1000).
@item NTUPLE_SIZE
File size per NTuple file (default: unlimited).
@item EVT_FILE_PATH
Directory where the files will be stored.
@item OUTPUT_PRECISION
Steers the precision of all numbers written to file.
@end table

To write events directly to gzipped files instead of plain text, the
option @option{--enable-gzip} has to be specified during the installation.

@node MPI parallelization
@subsection MPI parallelization
MPI parallelization in Sherpa can be enabled using the configuration
option @samp{--enable-mpi}. Sherpa supports
@uref{http://www.open-mpi.org/,,OpenMPI}
and
@uref{http://www.mcs.anl.gov/research/projects/mpich2/,,MPICH2}
. For detailed instructions on how to run a parallel program, please refer
to the documentation of your local cluster resources or the many excellent 
introductions on the internet. MPI parallelization is mainly intended to speed up
the integration process, as event generation can be parallelized trivially 
by starting multiple instances of Sherpa with different random seed, cf.
@ref{RANDOM_SEED}. However, both the internal analysis module and the Root
NTuple writeout can be used with MPI. Note that these require substantial 
data transfer. We only recommend to use them in MPI mode if your local cluster
has sufficient ethernet bandwidth.

@node Multi-threading
@subsection Multi-threading
@cindex PG_THREADS
@cindex COMIX_ME_THREADS
@cindex COMIX_PS_THREADS

Multi-threaded integration in Sherpa can be enabled using the configuration
option @samp{--enable-multithread}. Subsequently the computation of amplitudes
for large groups of processes is split into a number of threads which is limited 
from above by the parameter @option{PG_THREADS}. This parameter can also
be specified using the command line option @option{-j}, see @ref{Command line}.
Additionally, matrix-element calculation and phase-space evaluation for a 
single process with Comix can be distributed to different threads according to 
@mycite{Gleisberg2008fv}. The number of threads is then specified using the 
parameters @option{COMIX_ME_THREADS} and @option{COMIX_PS_THREADS}, respectively.
