@node SM
@subsubsection Standard Model
@cindex 1/ALPHAQED(0)
@cindex SIN2THETAW
@cindex VEV
@cindex CKM_Lambda
@cindex EW_SCHEME
@cindex CKM_Order
@cindex CKM_Cabibbo
@cindex CKM_A
@cindex CKM_Eta
@cindex CKM_Rho
@cindex CKM_Matrix_Elements
@cindex CKM_Output
@cindex ALPHAS(MZ)
@cindex ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE
@cindex ORDER_ALPHAS
@cindex ALPHAS_USE_PDF
@cindex WIDTH_SCHEME
@cindex PARTICLE_DATA_Mass
@cindex PARTICLE_DATA_Massive
@cindex PARTICLE_DATA_Width
@cindex PARTICLE_DATA_Active
@cindex PARTICLE_DATA_Stable
@cindex PARTICLE_DATA_Yukawa

The SM inputs for the electroweak sector can be given in four different 
schemes, that correspond to different choices of which SM physics 
parameters are considered fixed and which are derived from the given 
quantities. The input schemes are selected through the @code{EW_SCHEME} 
parameter, whose default is @option{1}. The following options are provided:
@itemize @bullet
  @item  Case @code{0}:
  
    all EW parameters are explicitly given.
    Here the W, Z and Higgs masses are taken as inputs, and
    the parameters @code{1/ALPHAQED(0)}, @code{ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE}
    (cf. below), @code{SIN2THETAW} (weak mixing angle), @code{VEV} (Higgs field
    vacuum expectation value) and @code{LAMBDA} (Higgs quartic coupling) have
    to be specified.

    Note that this mode allows to violate the tree-level relations between
    some of the parameters and might thus lead to gauge violations in some
    regions of phase space.
  @item  Case @code{1}:
  
    all EW parameters are calculated from the W, Z and Higgs masses and
    the fine structure constant (taken from @code{1/ALPHAQED(0)} +
    @code{ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE}, cf. below) using tree-level relations.
  @item  Case @code{2}:

    all EW parameters are calculated from the W, Z and Higgs masses and
    the fine structure constant (taken from @code{1/ALPHAQED(MZ)}) using
    tree-level relations.
  @item  Case @code{3}:
  
    this choice corresponds to the G_mu-scheme. The EW parameters are 
    calculated out of the weak gauge boson masses M_W, M_Z, the Higgs
    boson mass M_H and the Fermi constant @code{GF} using tree-level relations.
  @item  Case @code{4}:

    this choice corresponds to the scheme employed in the FeynRules/UFO setup.
    The EW parameters are calculated out of the Z boson mass M_Z, the Higgs
    boson mass M_H, the Fermi constant @code{GF} and the fine structure
    constant (taken from @code{1/ALPHAQED(0)} + @code{ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE},
    cf. below) using tree-level relations. Note, the W boson mass is not an
    input parameter in this scheme.
  @end itemize

The electro-weak coupling is by default not running, unless its running has been
enabled (cf. @ref{COUPLINGS}). In EW schemes 0 and 1, the squared scale at which
the fixed EW coupling is to be evaluated can be specified by
@code{ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE}, which defaults to the Z mass squared (note that
this scale has to be specified in GeV squared).
By default @code{1/ALPHAQED(0): 137.03599976} and
@code{ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE: 8315.18} (=mZ^2), which means that the MEs are
evaluated with a fixed value of @code{alphaQED=1/128.802}.

To account for quark mixing the CKM matrix elements have to be assigned. 
For this purpose the Wolfenstein parametrization @mycite{Wolfenstein1983yz} is
employed. The order of expansion in the lambda parameter is defined
through
@verbatim
CKM:
  Order: <order>
  # other CKM settings ...
@end verbatim

The default for @code{Order} is @option{0}, corresponding to a unit matrix.
The parameter convention for higher expansion terms reads:

@itemize @bullet
@item  @code{Order: 1}, the @code{Cabibbo} subsetting has to be set,
it parametrizes lambda and has the default value @option{0.22537}.
@item  @code{Order: 2}, in addition the value of @code{CKM_A} has to
be set, its default is @option{0.814}.
@item  @code{Order: 3}, the order lambda^3 expansion, @code{Eta}
and @code{Rho} have to be specified. Their default values are @option{0.353}
and @option{0.117}, respectively.
@end itemize

The CKM matrix elements V_ij can also be read in using
@verbatim
CKM:
  Matrix_Elements:
    i,j: <V_ij>
    # other CKM matrix elements ...
  # other CKM settings ...
@end verbatim

Complex values can be given by providing two values: @code{<V_ij> -> [Re, Im]}.
Values not explicitly given are taken from the afore computed Wolfenstein
parametrisation. Setting @code{CKM: @{Output: true@}} enables
an output of the CKM matrix.

The remaining parameter to fully specify the Standard Model 
is the strong coupling constant at the Z-pole, given through
@code{ALPHAS(MZ)}. Its default value is @option{0.118}. If the setup
at hand involves hadron collisions and thus PDFs, the value of the
strong coupling constant is automatically set consistent with the PDF fit
and can not be changed by the user. If Sherpa is compiled with LHAPDF
support, it is also possible to use the alphaS evolution provided
in LHAPDF by specifying @code{ALPHAS: @{USE_PDF: 1@}}. The perturbative order
of the running of the strong coupling can be set via @code{ORDER_ALPHAS},
where the default @option{0} corresponds to one-loop running and 
@code{1},@code{2},@code{3} to 2,3,4-loops, respectively. If the setup
at hand involves PDFs, this parameter is set consistent with the information
provided by the PDF set.

If unstable particles (e.g. W/Z bosons) appear as intermediate propagators
in the process, Sherpa uses the complex mass scheme to construct MEs
in a gauge-invariant way. For full consistency with this scheme,
by default the dependent EW parameters are also calculated from the complex
masses (@option{WIDTH_SCHEME: CMS}), yielding complex values e.g. for
the weak mixing angle.
To keep the parameters real one can set @option{WIDTH_SCHEME: Fixed}. This may
spoil gauge invariance though.

With the following switches it is possible to change the properties of
all fundamental particles:

@verbatim
PARTICLE_DATA:
  <id>:
    <Property>: <value>
    # other properties for this particle ...
  # data for other particles
@end verbatim

Here, @code{<id>} is the PDG ID of the particle for which one more properties
are to be modified. @code{<Property>} can be one of the following:
@table @code
@item Mass
Sets the mass (in GeV) of the particle.
@*
Masses of particles and corresponding anti-particles are always set
simultaneously.
@*
For particles with Yukawa couplings, those are enabled/disabled consistent with the
mass (taking into account the @option{Massive} parameter) by default, but that
can be modified using the @option{Yukawa} parameter. Note that by default the
Yukawa
couplings are treated as running, cf. @ref{YUKAWA_MASSES}.

@item Massive
Specifies whether the finite mass of the particle
is to be considered in matrix-element calculations or not. Can be @option{true}
or @option{false}.

@item Width
Sets the width (in GeV) of the particle.

@item Active
Enables/disables the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}. Can be @option{true}
or @option{false}.

@item Stable
Sets the particle either stable or unstable according
to the following options:
@table @option
@item 0
Particle and anti-particle are unstable
@item 1
Particle and anti-particle are stable
@item 2
Particle is stable, anti-particle is unstable
@item 3
Particle is unstable, anti-particle is stable
@end table
This option applies to decays of hadrons (cf. @ref{Hadron decays}) as well
as particles produced in the hard scattering (cf. @ref{Hard decays}).
For the latter, alternatively the decays can be specified explicitly in the
process setup (see @ref{Processes}) to avoid the narrow-width approximation.

@item Priority
Allows to overwrite the default automatic flavour sorting in a process by specifying a priority for the given flavour. This way one can identify certain particles which are part of a container (e.g. massless b-quarks), such that their position can be used reliably in selectors and scale setters.

@end table

Note: @code{PARTICLE_DATA} can also be used to the properties of hadrons, you
can use the same switches (except for @code{Massive}), see @ref{Hadronization}.
