@node Tevatron_TopPair
@section Tevatron_TopPair

@subsection Run.dat

This set-up is very similar to the @ref{LHC_TopPair} example above.
There are two notable differences. Firstly, obviously this is a Tevatron
set-up with proton anti-proton collisions at Tevatron energies. 
Secondly, there are two allowed decay channels.

This is the @code{(processes)} section of the run card:
@verbatim
(processes){
  Process 93 93 -> 6[a] -6[b] 93{1};
    DecayOS 6[a] -> 5 24[c];
      DecayOS 24[c] -> 90 91;
    DecayOS -6[b] -> -5 -24[d];
      DecayOS -24[d] -> 94 94;
  CKKW sqr(20/E_CMS);
  End process;

  Process 93 93 -> 6[a] -6[b] 93{1};
    DecayOS 6[a] -> 5 24[c];
      DecayOS 24[c] -> 94 94;
    DecayOS -6[b] -> -5 -24[d];
      DecayOS -24[d] -> 90 91;
  CKKW sqr(20/E_CMS);
  End process;
}(processes)
@end verbatim

The process generated is the production of a top pair from two light quarks, with 
possibly an extra final-state parton. Each top then decays into (anti-)bottom
quark and W+(-) boson. One of the W-bosons then decays leptonically, and 
the other decays to quarks. This time we include processes with either of 
the two W-bosons decaying leptonically, not just the W-, as in the
@ref{LHC_TopPair} example above.

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item there are two separate processes defined. Every different decay route
must have it's own process. It is not possible to group the different W-
decays into one top-production process. 

@end itemize



@subsection Run.analyse.dat

This set-up is very similar to the @ref{Tevatron_TopPair} one above, with exactly the same 
processes being generated. There are three main differences. Firstly, 
tags have been used when setting up the run-card. Secondly, a results 
directory has been set up. Thirdly, a Rivet 
analysis has been set up.

To see these differences, look at the @code{(run)} section of the 
run-card:
@verbatim
(run){
  EVENTS = 1000000

  NJET:=1; QCUT:=20

  RESULT_DIRECTORY = Results.QCUT
  GENERATE_RESULT_DIRECTORY = 1
  FRAGMENTATION = Off

  ANALYSIS = Rivet
}(run)
@end verbatim

and the @code{(analysis)} section:
@verbatim
(analysis){
  BEGIN_RIVET {
    -H NJETjet.QCUTGeV.ANATAG.aida
    -a CDF_2009_S8210160
  } END_RIVET
}(analysis)
@end verbatim


Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet

@item the results of the integration will be stored in the directory
specified by @code{RESULT_DIRECTORY}, see @ref{RESULT_DIRECTORY}. If 
Sherpa is run again with the parameters changed in such a way that you
would expect a different integration result (e.g. by varying @code{QCUT} in 
this example), then a new directory must be specified. This is automatically
done here by using the @code{QCUT} tag in the directory name.

@item if the result directory specified by @code{RESULT_DIRECTORY} has 
not already been created, the switch @code{GENERATE_RESULT_DIRECTORY} 
must be set to @option{1}.

@item to perform a Rivet analysis, the @ref{ANALYSIS} parameter must be 
set to Rivet, and an @code{(analysis)} section specifying the output aida files 
and the analyses to be performed must be included in the run-card.

@end itemize


