@node Tevatron_QCD
@section Tevatron_QCD

This example generates QCD events at the Tevatron,
with 2, 3 or 4 final state partons in the matrix
element. A run card with an example
analysis set-up enabled is also included in this folder, and called 
@code{Run.analyse.dat}. This run card provides an example of using weighted
events with Sherpa, and the use of the @ref{Enhance_Function} and 
@ref{Enhance_Factor} tags. To use this run card, as it is not named @option{Run.dat}, 
the parameter @code{RUNDATA} must be specified on the command line,
see @ref{Input structure}.

@comment  @subsection Run.dat

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/Tevatron_QCD/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Order_EW} is set to @option{0}. This
ensures that all final state jets are produced via 
the strong interaction.
@item an @code{NJetFinder} selector is used to 
set a resolution criterion for the two jets of the core process.
This is necessary because the `CKKW' tag does not apply any cuts to the core
process, but only to the extra-jet matrix elements, see @ref{Merging ME and PS}.
@end itemize

@comment  @subsection Run.analyse.dat 
@comment  
@comment  This run card also generates QCD events at the Tevatron, 
@comment  but it uses weighted events, and the
@comment  tags @ref{Enhance_Factor}, and @ref{Enhance_Function}. 
@comment  It also has some Rivet analyses enabled. For more information 
@comment  on using Rivet with Sherpa, see @ref{Rivet analyses}.
@comment  To use this run card, as it is not named @option{Run.dat}, 
@comment  the @code{RUNDATA} parameter must be specified on the command line,
@comment  see @ref{Input structure}.
@comment  
@comment  The run card looks like this:
@comment  
@comment  @example
@comment  @smallformat
@comment  @verbatiminclude Examples/Tevatron_QCD/Run.analyse.dat
@comment  @end smallformat
@comment  @end example
@comment  
@comment  Things to notice:
@comment  @itemize @bullet
@comment  @item the @ref{EVENT_GENERATION_MODE} has been set to generate weighted events
@comment  in the @code{(me)} section.
@comment  
@comment  @item the @ref{ANALYSIS} switch has been set to @option{Internal,Rivet}, enabling 
@comment  both the Rivet analyses listed, and the analyses using the internal Sherpa 
@comment  Analysis module.
@comment  
@comment  @item to use Sherpa's Analysis module, Sherpa has to be configured with the 
@comment  tag @option{--enable-analysis} on the command line. See @ref{ANALYSIS}.
@comment  
@comment  @item an @code{(analysis)} section is included. This lists the Rivet analyses to 
@comment  be performed, and specifies the internal analyses. 
@comment  
@comment  @item the Rivet analyses listed in this example (@option{D0_2008_S7662670} etc)
@comment  are all analyses valid for QCD jet production at the Tevatron. See @ref{Rivet analyses}
@comment  and the @uref{http://projects.hepforge.org/rivet/,,Rivet Website} for more details.
@comment  @end itemize



